**SO_LONG**

Le but du joueur est de collecter tous les items présents sur la carte, puis de s’échapper en empruntant le chemin le plus court possible.


*MinilibX*

La MinilibX est une petite librairie faite par 42 qui permet d'ouvrir des fenetres a l'écran et de faire des dessins dedans. Nous avons des man de la libX. Le premier, mlx, fait une description de comment elle fonctionne. Elle décrit aussi l'include à mettre dans le programme. Finalement, il donne la fonction qui nous connecte au service graphique du MAC : mlx_init(). Il existe trois autres man : 

- mlx_new_window : manage windows 
- mlx_pixel_put : draw inside window
- mlx_new_image : manipulate images
- mlx_loop : handle keyboard or mouse events

Finalement, il est indique comment compiler. Before we can do anything with the MiniLibX library we must include the <mlx.h> header to access all the functions and we should execute the mlx_init function. This will establish a connection to the correct graphical system and will return a void * which holds the location of our current MLX instance. Le pointeur void renvoye par mlx_init est l'identifiant de la connexion avec la librairie graphique. 

Un evenement est lorsque l'utilisateur utilise le clavier ou la souris et que nous voulons stocket/utiliser l'information. 

Sources : https://elearning.intra.42.fr/notions/minilibx/subnotions/mlx-events/videos/minilibx-events.  
Sources : https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/introduction.html. 
Set up on Mac : https://github.com/madebypixel02/so_long

           
**Installer MinilibX / Utiliser**

1. Git clone offical repo (https://github.com/42Paris/minilibx-linux)
2. Put it in directory, then cd inside, then make
3. Then go in the test folder (cd test) and test it (./mlx-test)
4. Amend your Makefile accordingly (https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/getting_started.html)
5. Finally, include it in your .h with "directoryname/mlx.h"

**Do stuff with Minilibx**

*Create a window that stays open*

```
#include <mlx.h>

int	main(void)
{
	void	*mlx;
	void	*mlx_win;

	mlx = mlx_init();
	mlx_win = mlx_new_window(mlx, 1920, 1080, "Hello world!");
	mlx_loop(mlx);
}
```

*Writing a pixel to an image*
the mlx_pixel_put function is very, very slow. This is because it tries to push the pixel instantly to the window (without waiting for the frame to be entirely rendered). Because of this sole reason, we will have to buffer all of our pixels to a image, which we will then push to the window.

1. Initialize the image

```
#include <mlx.h>

int	main(void)
{
	void	*img;
	void	*mlx;

	mlx = mlx_init();
	img = mlx_new_image(mlx, 1920, 1080);
}
```

2. Finding where to write the image

For this we need to get the memory address on which we will mutate the bytes accordingly. We retrieve this address as follows:

```
include <mlx.h>

typedef struct	s_data {
	void	*img;
	char	*addr;
	int		bits_per_pixel;
	int		line_length;
	int		endian;
}				t_data;

int	main(void)
{
	void	*mlx;
	t_data	img;

	mlx = mlx_init();
	img.img = mlx_new_image(mlx, 1920, 1080);

	/*
	** After creating an image, we can call `mlx_get_data_addr`, we pass
	** `bits_per_pixel`, `line_length`, and `endian` by reference. These will
	** then be set accordingly for the *current* data address.
	*/
	img.addr = mlx_get_data_addr(img.img, &img.bits_per_pixel, &img.line_length,
								&img.endian);
}
```

3. Creating the pixels 

Now we have the image address, but still no pixels. Before we start with this, we must understand that the bytes are not aligned, this means that the line_length differs from the actual window width. We therefore should ALWAYS calculate the memory offset using the line length set by mlx_get_data_addr.

```int offset = (y * line_length + x * (bits_per_pixel / 8));```

Now that we know where to write, it becomes very easy to write a function that will mimic the behaviour of mlx_pixel_put but will simply be many times faster:

```
typedef struct	s_data {
	void	*img;
	char	*addr;
	int		bits_per_pixel;
	int		line_length;
	int		endian;
}				t_data;

void	my_mlx_pixel_put(t_data *data, int x, int y, int color)
{
	char	*dst;

	dst = data->addr + (y * data->line_length + x * (data->bits_per_pixel / 8));
	*(unsigned int*)dst = color;
}
```

Because an image is represented in real time in a window, changing the same image will cause a bunch of screen-tearing when writing to it. You should therefore create two or more images to hold your frames temporarily. You can then write to a temporary image, so that you don’t have to write to the currently presented image.

4. Pushing images to a window

Now that we can finally create our image, we should also push it to the window, so that we can actually see it. This is pretty straight forward, let’s take a look at how we can write a red pixel at (5,5) and put it to our window:


```
#include <mlx.h>

typedef struct	s_data {
	void	*img;
	char	*addr;
	int		bits_per_pixel;
	int		line_length;
	int		endian;
}				t_data;

int	main(void)
{
	void	*mlx;
	void	*mlx_win;
	t_data	img;

	mlx = mlx_init();
	mlx_win = mlx_new_window(mlx, 1920, 1080, "Hello world!");
	img.img = mlx_new_image(mlx, 1920, 1080);
	img.addr = mlx_get_data_addr(img.img, &img.bits_per_pixel, &img.line_length,
								&img.endian);
	my_mlx_pixel_put(&img, 5, 5, 0x00FF0000);
	mlx_put_image_to_window(mlx, mlx_win, img.img, 0, 0);
	mlx_loop(mlx);
}
```


Source : https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/getting_started.html

**EVENTS**

Events are basically everything the user can do to interact with the program. Clicking anywhere in the window with the mouse is an event. Pressing a key is another. The minilibx allows us to register events that are able to be triggered after the loop has started. The minilibx calls these functions hooks.

There are five different hook functions we can actually make use of. You can register keyboard and mouse related event, as well as expose events. Expose events are triggered when the content of a window gets lost (for example, when the minilibx's window is covered partially or entirely by another) and needs to be re-drawn.

```
int	mlx_mouse_hook (void *win_ptr, int (*funct_ptr)(), void *param);
int	mlx_key_hook (void *win_ptr, int (*funct_ptr)(), void *param);
int	mlx_expose_hook (void *win_ptr, int (*funct_ptr)(), void *param);
int	mlx_loop_hook (void *mlx_ptr, int (*funct_ptr)(), void *param);
int	mlx_hook(void *win_ptr, int x_event, int x_mask, int (*funct)(), void *param);
```
Important things to note :

1. Organising data

 We are now using a t_data object to store all the important stuff. . We are only able to pass a single void pointer to the hook functions. Therefore, to pass multiple arguments, we obviously need a structure, in order to pass a pointer to this structure.

 2. Hooking into the KeyRelease event


In order for us to get the proper event, we use the mlx_key_hook function. The function that will be executed each time a key is released is handle_input. This is the duty of this function to check which key has been released, and to do things accordingly. We also pass the address of data which is the t_data object that contains all the stuff that we need to access inside handle_input.

The handle_input function checks if the key's symbol corresponds to the escape key. We included the X11/keysym.h header in order to get the values of all the available symbols.

That's because a key code is not the same thing than a key symbol. The key code for the "A" key on an AZERTY keyboard layout will be the same than the key code for the "Q" key on a QWERTY layout. However, what we want to deal with is the symbol. If the key I expect to be pressed is "A", I want it to be "A" whatever the keyboard layout of the user is. I want to get it by the symbol. The conversion is done internally by minilibx.

3. KeyRelease is not KeyPressed

One problem with these basic hooks (mlx_key_hook and mlx_mouse_hook) is that they only handle one event related to the keyboard and the mouse. For the keyboard, it is the KeyRelease event. However, we need an alternative for other events that the X Window System handles. That's exactly what the mlx_hook is used for. The mlx_hook function takes five arguments. We've already explained what win_ptr, func_ptr and param are, but there are two new parameters. Let's change the program to add an event handler for the KeyPress event:

```
#include <X11/X.h>

int	handle_keypress(int keysym, t_data *data)
{
	if (keysym == XK_Escape)
		mlx_destroy_window(data->mlx_ptr, data->win_ptr);

	printf("Keypress: %d\n", keysym);
	return (0);
}

int	handle_keyrelease(int keysym, void *data)
{
	printf("Keyrelease: %d\n", keysym);
	return (0);
}

int	main(void)
{
	t_data	data;

	data.mlx_ptr = mlx_init();
	if (data.mlx_ptr == NULL)
		return (MLX_ERROR);
	data.win_ptr = mlx_new_window(data.mlx_ptr, WINDOW_WIDTH, WINDOW_HEIGHT, "My first window!");
	if (data.win_ptr == NULL)
	{
		free(data.win_ptr);
		return (MLX_ERROR);
	}

	/* Setup hooks */ 
	mlx_loop_hook(data.mlx_ptr, &handle_no_event, &data);
	mlx_hook(data.win_ptr, KeyPress, KeyPressMask, &handle_keypress, &data); /* ADDED */
	mlx_hook(data.win_ptr, KeyRelease, KeyReleaseMask, &handle_keyrelease, &data); /* CHANGED */

	mlx_loop(data.mlx_ptr);

	/* we will exit the loop if there's no window left, and execute this code */
	mlx_destroy_display(data.mlx_ptr);
	free(data.mlx_ptr);
}
```


**DRAWING**

A computer screen is basically a 2D object that has x and y coordinates. By convention, it is considered that the top left corner of the screen is the origin (x = 0, y = 0). A common screen resolution, that is 1920x1080.

In this case, that means that there's 1080 rows of pixels on the screen, and that each row has 1920 pixels. The y axis is used to represent the row number, while the x axis is used to represent the column number.

Drawing pixels is the most basic thing a graphical library is used for, and the minilibx provides us simple ways of doing that. The straightforward way is to use the mlx_pixel_put function. 


```int	mlx_pixel_put(void *mlx_ptr, void *win_ptr, int x, int y, int color);```

1. Encoding a color

The minilibx is complying to the true color standard. Here's the definition of what the true color standard is, according to techopedia:

With the minilibx, we need to make the color fit into an int datatype. That means that we need the int datatype to be 32 bits on our system.

We need to encode our color into an int by setting the three least significant bits to the amount of red, green and blue, respectively. We can encode our int using two different ways:

- Settings the bits directly 
```
int	encode_rgb(uint8_t red, uint8_t green, uint8_t blue)
{
	return (red << 16 | green << 8 | blue);
}
```

- Using hexadecimal notation

Hexadecimal is widely used when using encoded values because it allows us to clearly distiguish the bytes that form an integer. To do so, we need to think about an hexadecimal number as groups of two digits. One group of two digits represents an entire byte.

Be aware tho, that in hexadecimal we have a total of sixteen digits used to represent a number ```(0123456789 ((abcdef) || (ABCDEF)))```.

For example, let's say we're assigning the value ```0x00FF00FF``` to an integer. Just by looking at the number, we can tell that red is FF (255), green is 0 and blue is FF (255). This can only be used if we know the color oat compile time. Otherwise we must use the ```encode_rgb``` function.


2. Putting pixels on a window, simple version 

Here, we're making use of the ```render``` function, the address of which is passed to the ```mlx_loop_hook``` function. In the previous post, we called this function ```handle_no_event```, because it is triggered continuously while the loop is running. Because the ```render``` function's code needs to be run at each frame, we can use it to render all the things we want to display on the screen!

Notice the call to ```mlx_pixel_put```. We passed it two coordinates, that are the half of the window's width and height respectively, which gives us the center of the window. The color is specified in the hexadecimal format, as a macro called ```RED_PIXEL```.

The if statement added before the ```mlx_pixel_put``` function is here to ensure the window still exists, to avoid puting a pixel on a window that is no longer available. Moreover, we needed to ensure that our ```win_ptr``` was set to ```NULL``` after the call to ```mlx_destroy_window``` to make this check actually work.


```
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#include <X11/X.h>
#include <X11/keysym.h>
#include <mlx.h>

#define WINDOW_WIDTH 600
#define WINDOW_HEIGHT 300

#define MLX_ERROR 1

#define RED_PIXEL 0xFF0000

typedef struct s_data
{
	void	*mlx_ptr;
	void	*win_ptr;
}	t_data;

int	render(t_data *data)
{
	/* if window has been destroyed, we don't want to put the pixel ! */
	if (data->win_ptr != NULL)
		mlx_pixel_put(data->mlx_ptr, data->win_ptr, 
			WINDOW_WIDTH / 2, WINDOW_HEIGHT / 2, RED_PIXEL);
	return (0);
}

int	main(void)
{
	t_data	data;

	data.mlx_ptr = mlx_init();
	if (data.mlx_ptr == NULL)
		return (MLX_ERROR);
	data.win_ptr = mlx_new_window(data.mlx_ptr, WINDOW_WIDTH, WINDOW_HEIGHT,
								"my window");
	if (data.win_ptr == NULL)
	{
		free(data.win_ptr);
		return (MLX_ERROR);
	}
	mlx_loop(data.mlx_ptr);

	/* we will exit the loop if there's no window left, and execute this code */
	mlx_destroy_display(data.mlx_ptr);
	free(data.mlx_ptr);
}
```

Now, to draw a rectangle, we would amend to the following. ```(t_rect){}``` is what is called a compound literal. Since C99, this is a way to initialize structures without having to manually assign each member. I'm directly passing a structure by value here.

These render_rect function calls will display two rectangles: one in the upper left corner of the window (red), and the other in the bottom right corner (green).

```
#define GREEN_PIXEL 0xFF00

typedef struct s_rect
{
	int	x;
	int	y;
	int width;
	int height;
	int color;
}	t_rect;

/* The x and y coordinates of the rect corresponds to its upper left corner. */

int render_rect(t_data *data, t_rect rect)
{
	int	i;
	int j;

	if (data->win_ptr == NULL)
		return (1);
	i = rect.y;
	while (i < rect.y + rect.height)
	{
		j = rect.x;
		while (j < rect.x + rect.width)
			mlx_pixel_put(data->mlx_ptr, data->win_ptr, j++, i, rect.color);
		++i;
	}
	return (0);
}

int	render(t_data *data)
{
	render_rect(data, (t_rect){WINDOW_WIDTH - 100, WINDOW_HEIGHT - 100,
			100, 100, GREEN_PIXEL});
	render_rect(data, (t_rect){0, 0, 100, 100, RED_PIXEL});

	return (0);
}

```

3. Actually drawing images on a window

The mlx_pixel_put function basically draws the pixel on the window directly, and the person who's looking at the window will see the change instantly. That's bad here because what we actually want to do is waiting for the whole background to be drawn, as well as the rectangles, and then push that on the window. Because everything is done without any delay, this is giving us this dirty flickering effect.

One of the prefered way of drawing things on a window is to use images. The goal is to create an image (which is nothing else than a collection of pixels) and edit its pixels directly. When it is done, we will push that image on the window and we should have our graphics properly rendered without any flickering issue.

owever, it is interesting to notice that the minilibx is making use of the Xshm extension, which allows our program to share images with the X Server through shared memory (/dev/shm) and not through the socket like it is the case when using any Xlib routine.

Remember how we were continously calling mlx_pixel_put to put our pixels on the window. With images shared in memory, we'll be able to change the pixels directly, using a pointer. To be clear, this is way faster, and that's why we want to use it!

A. CREATING A NEW IMAGE

We will be using the function mlx_new_img = ```void	*mlx_new_image(void *mlx_ptr,int width,int height);```

The first thing we need to do is to create a ```t_img``` type that will hold all the stuff we need to work with an mlx image. The ```mlx_img``` member refers to the address ```mlx_new_image``` returns. The remaining members are needed, we're going to look at it in a minute. For now, let's create our image. In order to do that, we need to have a place to store it so let's a dd a new property to our t_data object.

```
typedef struct s_data
{
	void	*mlx_ptr;
	void	*win_ptr;
	t_img	img;
}	t_data;
```

```
typedef struct s_img
{
	void	*mlx_img;
	char	*addr;
	int		bpp; /* bits per pixel */
	int		line_len;
	int		endian;
}	t_img;
```

Now, let's create the image : ```data.img.mlx_img = mlx_new_image(data.mlx_ptr, WINDOW_WIDTH, WINDOW_HEIGHT);```

Moving on, to make this work we will need a bunch of information we can access with the ```mlx_get_data_addr``` function : ```char	*mlx_get_data_addr(void *img_ptr, int *bits_per_pixel, int *size_line, int *endian);```



B. ACCESSING A PIXEL 

We need to retrieve a pixel at some x and y coordinates, but we don't have a two dimensional array here: we're dealing with a one dimensional array. Also remember that we're dealing with bytes here, but one pixel takes more than one byte because we're using the true colors standard. This amount is given by the ```bpp``` (in bits) value we've got from ```mlx_get_data_addr```.

For this example, let's assume we want to get the pixel at coordinates (5, 10). What we want is the 5th pixel of the 10th row.

Window/image dimensions are 600x300.

To begin with, let's find the correct row. The previous mlx_get_data_addr call provided us the line_len value, which is basically the amount of bytes taken by one row of our image. It is equivalent to image_width * (bpp / 8).

In our case, an int is four bytes, so it is 600 * 4 = 2400. Therefore we can say that the first row begins at the index 0, the second one at the index 2400, the third one at the index 4800, and so on. Thus we can find the correct row index by doing 2400 * 10.

To find the correct column, we will need to move in the row by the given number of pixels. In our case, we want to move 5 pixels "right". To do that, we need to multiply 5 by the number of bytes a pixel actually takes (here 4). Thus we will do 5 * 4 = 20.

If we summarize, we can find the correct index with the following computation: index = 2400 * 10 + 5 * 4.

That's it! We just need to generalize the formula using the values mlx_get_data_addr provided us. The following formula is the one we'll use: ```index = line_len * y + x * (bpp / 8)```

Now that we have the formula, let's implement the img_pix_put function that will put a pixel at (x, y) coordinates of the image. It will act as a replacement for the mlx_pixel_put function.

```
void	img_pix_put(t_img *img, int x, int y, int color)
{
	char    *pixel;

    pixel = img->addr + (y * img->line_len + x * (img->bpp / 8));
	*(int *)pixel = color;
}
```

C. DRAWING FUNCTIONS 

What we need to do now is to change every drawing function to make it use the t_img object instead of the window directly. Now we're performing all our drawing operations on our image instead of directly pushing the pixels on the screen.

Sources : https://aurelienbrabant.fr/blog/getting-started-with-the-minilibx



*RANDOM*

- Difference between ```.``` and ```->``` ?

```.``` is the member of a structure  
```->``` is the member of a POINTED TO structure  

So the . is used when there is a direct access to a variable in the structure. But the -> is used when you are accessing a variable of a structure through a pointer to that structure.

- What is an XPM file?

An .xpm file is an X-Windows PixMap file. This file format describes the image in a form that can be read by C and C++ compilers. The image can be viewed in a plain text editor (some, like vim, will show the actual image), or in most image viewing applications.  

- Keypress meanings ? 

When calling the key_press function to hook a symbol, simply to HK_key. Example as follows. 

```
int	key_press(int keysym, t_data *data)
{
	if (keysym == XK_Escape)
		end(data);
	if (keysym == XK_w)
		render_top(data);
	if (keysym == XK_d)
		render_right(data);
	if (keysym == XK_a)
		render_left(data);
	if (keysym == XK_s)
		render_down(data);
	return (0);
}
```

- What is a sprite ?

A sprite is a type of "stand-alone" computer graphic element that has evolved along with modern computer graphics technologies. A sprite is defined as a two-dimensional image or animated image that plays a specific role, often independently manipulated, within a larger image environment. Sprites are also known as icons.

Source :  https://medium.com/geekculture/build-a-game-using-tilesets-ee4a09c69b27

- What is a tileset?

Tilemaps are a very popular technique in 2D game development, consisting of building the game world or level map out of small, regular-shaped images called tiles. This results in performance and memory usage gains — big image files containing entire level maps are not needed, as they are constructed by small images or image fragments multiple times.